# World

The land we find ourselves is called many things by many people.  By the Duq |dʌq/
people, it is called Yigdog /jɪG.dɐg/. By the Mednem /mɜdɲɛm/ people, it is called Bondiq /bɑɲɑdɪq/. The
Heuzha /χœʐɑ/ people were not from Doq, as the land is called in the pidgin used for
trade between the Duq and the Mednem. Thus, they took to calling the land Doq /dɑq/,
or amongst themselves sometimes Leutshe, which is a compound word meaning "new
homeland".

Doq is a country surrounded by water and barred off from trading with the rest
of the world due to the limitations of transport technology in the area.

The Duq live in the border regions of the land, in the craggy mountains and
fast flowing rivers which surround a massive basin receiving water from atop
the mountains. They subsist off of the fish in the rivers, the game in the
forests, and the rich foraging potential present in a very temperate,
water-rich mountain environment. Their culture is martial; living in the
mountains is hard, and their culture forces their children to train and make
great personal sacrifices in order to endure this environment. They
predominantly produce tools and weaponry made of stone and wood, but there are
rumors that in the halls of some of their mountain fortresses, hammers have
begun to shape metals into sharp points and useful tools. Religiously, the Duq
are animistic, believing that the natural world contains agency and the objects
and beings within it are engaged in spiritual conflict.

The Mednem historically lived in the interior of the land, living off of the
agricultural products they could harvest or farm there. They had no great need
for weaponry, as the mountain dwellers could support much lower populations and
were not a great threat to their larger settlements. Their tools were stone and
wood, like the dominant ones used by the Duq. They didn't have much of a need
to fight each other, either, as their harvests were vast. The rivers flowing
down from the mountain would flood the shallow plains in different formations
each year, and some of the older Mednem claim that their wisemen used to help
direct the rivers to improve their agricultural production and even as a
military tool. Culturally, the Mednem are rivergoing folk. They can craft
usable rafts in a pinch and on the coasts of the land there are great ports at
which boats can be seen that fly using the power of the wind. The weather
outside of their harbors on the open sea is quite gnarly, however, and there is
no consistent naval trade with outside areas. There is talk of a boat which has
left and returned more than once, bringing great innovations and products from
the outside world, and some even speculate that by the coast there are totally
alien peoples to this land. There is no one Mednem religion, but instead a
series of often localized deities.  Oftentimes, there are gods which go by
different names but have very similar attributes. The attributes of these gods
have many common characteristics, but they can have idiosyncratic ones as well.
These deities are believed to have regional, local, or global power, and can
have all different varieties of influence. The folklore of this influence and
the web of gods and their relationships could be the focus of an entire book,
and many confused ones have been written. Untangling this mess might reveal
helpful connections.

The Heuzha people are the reason why the Mednem "historically" lived in the
agricultural basin and not contemporarily. Clearly a people bruised from great
violence, they were able to quietly assimilate into Mednem culture very easily.
Because of the vast internal differences in Mednem religious practices, their
linguistic differences were much more concerning to onlookers than their moral
or spiritual ones. That said, the resilience of a people fleeing violence can
be incredible, and their communities in each agricultural settlement managed to
quickly learn the local Mednem tongues and quietly assimilate into their
societies. Technologically, it seemed they didn't bring anything amazing to the
table, and they quietly existed as one subculture within the Mednem for some
decades. After this, the population of the Heuzha had grown such that they had
their own settlements, and their original tongue came into use again, mixed
with many words and the occasional grammatical construct from the Mednem
tongues they had gained on their way. Once the first foals were transported
over the mountains and they had been raised and bred over a few generations, it
was realized that the Heuzha had been a nomadic people, migrating with the help
of large pack animals and horses which they lived in close proximity to. The
land of Doq wasn't perfect for this, as the winters and rainy seasons were hard
on their herds, but some of these new horseriding clans of Heuzha people
realized they could simply take from those who were weaker to supply their
herds with the sustenance they needed. Riding their horses shooting bow and
arrow, throwing stones, and using wood and stone spears, the Heuzha dominated
the big open fields of the interior. Instead of being farmed, these regions
were now left to grow and be grazed upon by the great herds of horses which had
been transported over the mountains. The Mednem's oceanside strongholds, walled
in with great redwood trees made flush together, were not easily taken by the
Heuzha riders, as the humidity of the land prevented fire from being a useful
tool against the wood.

The Mednem are now culturally and politically divided amongst their great
cities, with some operating as representative democracies and others as cultic
followings of some object or person. There are dozens of settlements along the
coast, with sea travel between them able to take place due to the barrier
islands creating an internal superharbor where the nasty weather doesn't hurt
so bad. Land travel outside of the city is heavily monitored, and thus these
cities have had to be made quite large to accomodate significant agricultural
activity.  The population of the Mednem is at historic lows due to the massive
reduction in their arable land, but as the only agricultural people of the
three, their population still outstrips that of the Heuzha and Duq combined.  A
Heuzha raider would choose a weak Mednem farmhouse over a Duq family cabin
anyday, and those are still scattered throughout the landscape. Many of the
Mednem farmers have sworn fealty to the Heuzha and provide them with food as
well as allowing their herds to graze on their land, and cultural integration
between Heuzha and Mednem common peoples is still quite common. It is also
common that sedentary peoples are ousted from their lands entirely, and Heuzha
who have integrated into the lands for many years are no exception to this,
also being targeted by their Heuzha brethren. Outside of the coastal towns, the
feeling between the downtrodden Heuzha and Mednem is one of predominantly
camaradery and shared struggle, while inside of the walls of the great towns
Heuzha people have come to represent danger, violence, and historical loss.

The Duq are politically decentralized, but have at all times a Tuqlug, someone
who can summon great hosts and councils and command some very limited control
over the people. Usually, this control is exercised via influence over local
family heads, who are using their assistance and respect as a way to vie to be
chosen as Tuqlug, as they are elected upon the previous one's death. This
control is highly limited, and a family head will not bring ruin to their own
in order to come to his call. The cost they'll pay for this is purely social,
not legal, and there is no widely accepted process for a Tuqlug to punish
disobedience. In a way, he's like the popularly accepted and canonized head of
the culture, and has the informal influence that this would imply. If the
support of the people is behind his actions, this can translate into a lot more
power than it sounds like, but this power can dissolve quickly upon stress or
failure. The Duq are known to stick by their economic pathways and fight over
them. For instance, if a Duq family had fished a river one year, they might
want to stay there the next year and fish it again. There is some cultural
consideration about preserving these natural resources, but because some other
family could come along and consume it out from under you, there is some
impetus to consume all of the resources available to you. Thus, some amount of
Duq migration is always expected due to local resource shortages. Their
mountain strongholds have more complex, diversified economies of unknown
proportions, as they are very difficult to visit. They are the only places
where a Heuzha raid is completely unexpected, though in general it is less
likely that a Duq family will find themselves in a place where Heuzha military
methods have great strength.

The Heuzha are politically divided in an authority structure based on
subservience.  They have a linguistic and cultural structure to convey personal
subservience having two forms. One form indicates that this subservience is due
to the strength of the other, and the other indicates that this subservience is
due to loyalty to the other. The Heuzha political system is comprised of a
great deal of these relations, each of them existing for different periods of
time and for different reasons. It is considered honorable for a young rider in
Heuzha society to never submit due to strength, and always submit due to
loyalty, and it was considered deeply dishonorable to be in a state where one
is subservient due to strength. So if one was militarily conquered and
submitted through that way, the vassalage or subservience which would be
invoked would be almost a dirty word to the conquered, a sort of social shame
which would pervade their life. The word Shuth is referring to someone who is
proud, or should be proud, of their subservience relations, and one who is no
subservience relation to another. One who maintains only subservience by fear
is suspected of being the real problem, rather than the ones who are
subservient, so there is some nuance, but being one who has submitted through
force amongst many of those who submitted through loyalty is considered greatly
shameful.  There is an informal social ritual where one asserts the conversion
of a dishonorable subservience to an honorable one, and this is something of a
public forgiveness. Otherwise, your children's willing submission after your
death can convert your family's form of submission. Anything which can take the
form of subservience relations is broadly politically possible in Heuzha culture,
and they range from being totally divided to totally unified in this form.
